# PHI334 October 27 | Employment Wrap Up 

Hey all, welcome back. I hope you had a restful week and that you got a chance to relax. I think that there is a lesson here too when it comes to business ethics--on the necessity of taking breaks, of the life work balance, that sort of thing. Either way, welcome, and today we will finish talking about moral issues in employment. 

So, what did we talk about, to remind us, when it comes to employment? We talked about wage, job hopping, and office community. I would like to begin by asking what you think is the issue that spoke most to you. So again, here are the issues, in brief. 

Wage: we know the issues are that (1) wages are not discussed internally to a company, (2) there is a gap between wage and productivity, (3) young people are bad at, or even incapable of, negotiating a wage, (4) wage as a notion is disappearing altogether. Note the rise of free lance work and all that. I used lyft to get to and from the airport in Lexington. I used doordash to get food last night. Those drivers do not make a wage, they are contractors. They make per contract revenues. I paid some guy $20 on Fiver to spam an app I made to a bunch of social networks. That is a thing that guy does, he does not earn a wage. Do any of these speak to you in a sense? How do we address it? I have some thoughts I am willing to share. 

Job hopping: the trend of frequently switching jobs, presents challenges to the pursuit of a good life. Historically, job loyalty in the early 20th century provided stability through lifelong employment, supported by societal expectations and benefits like pension plans. However, by the late 20th century, factors like economic downturns and corporate focus on short-term profits reduced job security. Today's digital age and globalization prioritize adaptability and diverse skillsets, making job hopping more commonplace. While this can offer broader skills and potentially higher pay, it also introduces stress from continuously adapting to new roles and cultures. The absence of long-term security can foster feelings of instability. What is to be done about that? Anything? Things, I suspect, are going to get worse. 

Corporate culture: it is the pervasive atmosphere and set of practices within an organization, molded by leadership and manifested in both overt values and unspoken norms. While it influences every facet of workplace life, it's not always conducive to personal well-being. Rigid cultures can suppress individuality, promote overwork, and stifle dissent, often leading to burnout, ethical conflicts, and mental health concerns. Additionally, intense adherence to a specific culture might overshadow work-life balance, hinder innovation, and exclude diverse perspectives. What to do about this? Is the solution to try and minimize the time you work and aim to run your own business? 
