# PHI315, Aug 30 Lesson Plan: What is Science Fiction? 

On Monday, we discussed what it is that I take philosophy to be. You may disagree, but that is the view of philosophy that I adopt for the purpose of the framework I am establishing for you to use in the course of this class. The fundamental idea is using philosophy in conjunction with science fiction as a means of exploring possibilities. I will discuss running them together on Friday. Today, I want to focus on what I take science fiction to be. 

We are, once again, going to play the "what is in a name" game in regard to the name "science fiction". I do not like definitions, so instead we are just going to explore what we think it is. So, then, tell me what you think science fiction is. **What is science fiction or sci-fi?**

There are two words here, *science* and *fiction* that we need to explore. Let us begin with *fiction*. **What does** ***fiction*** **mean?**

We generally distinguish between works based on whether they are fiction or not. A textbook is not fiction, a biography on Steve Jobs is not fiction, and a science book on space is not fiction. Such books may use fictional analogies to explain things, but the things that they explain, these things are non-fictional. So, perhaps, we can say that works divide, as it were into fictional and non-fictional works. 

What is this dividing that I am doing? This methodology is called the method of division, first practiced by Plato, where something is delineated from other things based on difference. For example, suppose we want to determine what a cat is. We do so by saying that there exist animals, and of animals, there are those with scales and those without. Those that are without scales are either four legged or two legged. Those that are four legged are either evil or good. Those that are evil, four legged, without scales are cats. This is a simple example, but the point is that we give a determination (note, not definition) of cat by pointing to explicit features that it exhibits. We do not make the mistake of thinking that we get at the essence of catness by so determining it, rather, we get at the general features of a thing that makes us recognize it as a cat. Whether these are essential features or merely superfluous is unclear. But the idea is to point to traits and features that approach essential properties. Plato did not explicitly think he was defining terms in this way, rather, for him, it was an attempt to get at the essence of a thing to identify it. This is not definition, because definition implies the full articulation of the essence, while I suspect Plato was wise enough to know that we do not grasp forms in full, at least in this life. It is a recollecting, not a grabbing. 

So, back to the distinction we were making, there are works that are fictional and non-fictional. Non-fictional works seem to be about that which is, or that which exists. Non-fiction is associated with a kind of dry, objective, realism. It has artistic flair as all works do, but the idea is that a non-fictional work is to convey the truth in a way that is non-distorting. It attempts to capture Truth and Reality as they are, as they happened. ***Non-fiction is about the world as it is.*** 

What can we then infer about fiction then? If non-fiction is about how the world actually is, fiction is about the world could be. If something is imaginable, then in principle it possible. Thus, any imagined world is a possible world, a possible way our world could have been should the conditions been different. The talk of possibility versus necessity is referred to as modal talk. When we speak of modality, in philosophy, we speak about possibility and necessity. We will discuss possibility and necessity on Friday. 

I should clarify this further. When we speak about what *could have been*, for example, we speak about the way in which our current world could have unfolded. In so doing, we presume that in principle, things could have been otherwise. We also speak about what *could be*, and in so doing, we discuss a potential way for our world to unfold, suggesting we do not take it to be deterministic. Nobody knows whether the world is deterministic. This is not because physics is not true. Rather, the world is so complex that it is impossible to determine the way in which things can unfold. Moreover, at the quantum scale, the world is fundamentally probabilistic. This means that there are several possible ways for things to unfold, and while this is still determined, it simply means that we do not know how things will unfold. 

Thus, fiction is fundamentally work that is about the way things could have been and the way things could be, both presently and in the future. Fiction about the way in which the world could be now is temporally interesting, since the present does seem to depend on the past, but in terms of language, we say the same *could be* in referring to the present and the future. I think there is something interesting here to pursue, but I am unsure of what it is exactly, and it seems to be beyond the scope of this lecture, however, do think about this and do talk to me if you have thoughts on the matter. 

We have a tentative determination of fiction: *work about that which could have been or that which could be, either presently on in the future*. The task now is to define fiction 