# PHI315: LP 'San Junipero' Oct 18

General Notes: 

Setting 80s, specifically 1987. Kelly. 80s discotece, big ick from the 'you are good at this guy'. Wes is the guy Kelly talks to. Wes wont leave Kelly alone. Yorkie is the nerd woman. Kelly and Yorkie. The Quagmire. Glasses as a comfort thing. Authenticity in the virtual world, outfits, things of that nature. Tourist. First Night. Yorkie's shyness, social norms changing. Transgressive things one gets up to in the meta verse. Doing what you have never done before. Does virtuality allow for that? The concept of "Midnight". Yorkie and her fiance, Greg. Engagement in life versus virtuality. Kelly propositions her. Scene one over.

One week later. Yorkie trying on different looks. Returns to what she is. Nerd. Wes still chasing Kelly, threat of red light. Locals are like dead people. Quagmire as a place for sex. Kelly thinks it was just sex, Wes seems obsessed. Kelly sees Yorkie, dances with guy. To make her jealous? Yes. Yorkie "does not know how to do this" and asks Kelly for help, to make it easy for her. Jeep drive. Kelly has been there a couple months. They make love. Supposedly Yorkie is a virgin. Fiance is supposedly complicated. Kelly is bisexual. Kelly was married once. Husband chose not to stick around, and now she is passing through. Just wants to have a good time. Question of loss. Also, midnight, what does that mean? Time is almost up, Kelly says, glancing at clock. What does midnight mean? End of scene two. 

Another week later. Yorkie goes to the bar again. Bartender suggests the Quagmire as the location to check. Grimy factory bar? Grunge, weird bar, hedonist bar? What is the Quagmire? Freaky people. Very freaky people, everyone doing god knows what, hedonism? Very fucked up stuff, fights, weird sex acts going on. Wes is there, drunk. "You too, huh?". Try a different time, he says. 80s, 90s, 2002. Different decades? Different virtual worlds? End of scene three. 

One week later. 1980. Earlier? Same? Chrysler Cordoba. Week latee again. 1996. Yorkie keeps searching for Kelly. It is now the 90s. Checks on the house, but Kelly not there. Another week goes by. 2002. Kelly is much younger now. Doing dance dance revolution. "Cant get you outta my head" plays, classic choice. Kelly asks why she is there, wanted a change of music. Era questions. Yorkie accuses of hiding, and Kelly responds that nothing is owed. Manners come up. For Kelly it just means fun. Hedonism? It is not fun, she says. Is it all about fun? What about feeling bad? Feeling something, as Yorkie puts it. The question of ethics of behavior in the virtual world. Kelly walks out and goes looking for Yorkie, who now sits on roof. They meet on the roof, talk of a pain slider and it being set to zero. How many of them are dead, asks Yorkie. Full timers the fully dead ones are called. 80-85 responds Kelly. SO 80-85% of all people in the virutal world are "dead". Consicousness upload? Kelly would not and does not do feelings. Yorkie freaked her out. Kelly does not want to "like" anyone, goes back to their talk about marriage. Kelly does not know how long there is, and cannot have that. What does it mean she does not know how long there is? Next week Yorkie is getting married, she says. She has to she says. A good guy he is. He pities her? The question of not knowing how long is left. Kelly has cancer, there are three months left. Is Kelly going to stay here? No. Kelly is done when she is done--she is going to die. Why? Richard. Her husband, Richard, died two years ago, had the opportunity to stay in San Junipero, but refused, did not want to take it. Would not even visit or even try it. So Kelly is going to die for real, because her husband refused. This is sad. Yorkie says they could not have ever met in real life. Try me, says Kelly. Why what is the point? Where are you? Carson City, Nevada. That is where Kelly is. Santa Rosa California is where Yorkie is. Scared of being seen. Kelly is dying. Death, life,  appearance, reality. They want to meet in real life. End of scene. 

Kelly goes to visit. She is an old lady. Cannot respond, but can hear. She is in a vegetative state? Greg, the employee. Yorkie is going to pass over, which surprises Greg. Turns out, Greg says, that Yorkie is sampling the version before going. Greg is not a fiance. Yorkie is a quadrapeligic. Yorkie is a lesbian, gets in car, crashes, becomes a parapelegic when 21. Been whole life for her. Five hour weekly limit before you pass over. World of memories and Alzheimer's. Marriage with Greg, euthanasia. Yorkie's family will not sign off on the passing over, so Greg is marrying her so he can authorize her passing over as husband. No limit after passing. Kelly wants to see her for a bit again, there and then. End scene. 

They meet on the beach. Never been there during daylight. They talk about passing over. Kelly proposes. They get married. Yorkie is then euthanized. Back in San Junipero, Yorkie sees seagulls. Kelly pulls up in her Jeep. Is it different for Yorkie now that she lives there? She asks Kelly to pass over, to be with her. Kelly just wants to enjoy the night. The question of choice. Yorkie is pushing it, pushes the idea that her husband chose to leave her. Calls him selfish. Kelly slaps Yorkie. 49 years we find out Kelly and her husband were together. Kelly was committed to her husband. Kelly is offended. They had a daughter. Alison. Died at 39. Richard and her felt it. Richard chose not to, because their daughter did not make it to the virtual world. Supposedly nothing matters. Lost people at Quagmire trying to feel something. Does that mean Quagmire is where the ones that have stayed for a long time went to? Kelly crashes her car. // I want to discuss the Quagmire and what it means -- will all who upload get bored eventually and seek out more deranged feelings just to feel something?? // 

Kelly comes to in the real world. Yorkie is still virtual, of course she is. Kelly's nursing home or whatever it is. She is got that nose thing now. How odd that they have mind upload tech but cannot cure cancer. We see Kelly cough a lot, suffering and struggling. Kelly says she is ready. For what? For the rest of it. Has she decided to pass over as well? We are back to seeing Yorkie is a Mazda Miata, driving around. Kelly gets the euthanasia. Is buried. We see Yorkie drive up to the beach house, and there comes Kelly! She decided to pass over!!! They drive together. We see the server room. They are partying it up at the 80s bar. We see both of their IDs, and then the whole room of them. 